[docs] Expo Router: add docs for missing API reference (#23355)
expo/expo: docs/pages/router/reference/hooks.mdx

---
title: Hooks API
description: Learn how to interact with the in-app URL in Expo Router.
---

import { FileTree } from '~/ui/components/FileTree';
import { RouteUrlGroup, RouteUrl } from '~/ui/components/RouteUrl';

<RouteUrlGroup>

> In Expo Router, there's always a valid URL which represents the currently focused route. Use hooks to observe changes and interact with the URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Expo Router, there's always a valid URL that represents the currently focused route. Use hooks to observe changes and interact with the URL.
```

Correct pronoun usage.

## `usePathname`

> Returns the currently selected route location without search parameters. e.g. `/acme?foo=bar` -> `/acme`. Segments will be normalized: `/[id]?id=normal` -> `/normal`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns the currently selected route location without search parameters. For example, `/acme?foo=bar` -> `/acme`. Segments will be normalized: `/[id]?id=normal` -> `/normal`
```

<RouteUrl>/profile/baconbrix?extra=info</RouteUrl>

```js app/profile/[user].tsx
import { Text } from 'react-native';
/* @info */
import { usePathname } from 'expo-router';
/* @end */

export default function Route() {
  /* @info <b>pathname = "/profile/baconbrix"</b> */
  const pathname = usePathname();
  /* @end */

  return <Text>User: {user}</Text>;
}
```

## `useLocalSearchParams`

> Returns the URL search parameters for the contextually selected route. Refer to the [local vs global search params](/router/reference/search-parameters/#local-vs-global-search-parameters) guide for more info.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns the URL search parameters for the contextually selected route. Refer to the [local vs. global search params](/router/reference/search-parameters/#local-vs-global-search-parameters) guide for more information.
```

<FileTree files={['app/_layout.tsx', 'app/[first]/home.tsx', 'app/[second]/shop.tsx']} />

> When `/abc/home` pushes `/123/shop`, `useGlobalSearchParams` would return `{ first: undefined, second: '123' }` on `/app/[first]/home.tsx` because the global URL has changed. However, you may want the params to remain `{ first: 'abc' }` to reflect the context of the screen. In this case, you can use `useLocalSearchParams` to ensure the params `{ first: 'abc' }` are still returned in `/app/[first]/home.tsx`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `/abc/home` pushes `/123/shop`, `useGlobalSearchParams` returns `{ first: undefined, second: '123' }` on **/app/[first]/home.tsx** because the global URL has changed. However, you may want the params to remain `{ first: 'abc' }` to reflect the context of the screen. In this case, you can use `useLocalSearchParams` to ensure the params `{ first: 'abc' }` are still returned in **/app/[first]/home.tsx**.
```

<RouteUrl>/profile/baconbrix?extra=info</RouteUrl>

```js app/profile/[user].tsx
import { Text } from 'react-native';
/* @info */
import { useLocalSearchParams } from 'expo-router';
/* @end */

export default function Route() {
  /* @info */
  const { user, extra } = useLocalSearchParams();
  /* @end */
  return <Text>User: {user}</Text>;
}
```

## `useGlobalSearchParams`

> Returns the URL search parameters for the globally selected route. e.g. `/acme?foo=bar` -> `{ foo: "bar" }`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns the URL search parameters for the globally selected route. For example, `/acme?foo=bar` -> `{ foo: "bar" }`.
```

Refer to the [local vs global search params](/router/reference/search-parameters/#local-vs-global-search-parameters) guide for more info.

<RouteUrl>/profile/baconbrix?extra=info</RouteUrl>

```js app/profile/[user].tsx
import { Text } from 'react-native';
/* @info */
import { useGlobalSearchParams } from 'expo-router';
/* @end */

export default function Route() {
  /* @info <b>user=baconbrix</b> & <b>extra=info</b> */
  const { user, extra } = useGlobalSearchParams();
  /* @end */
  return <Text>User: {user}</Text>;
}
```

### `Href` type

The `Href` type is a union of the following types:

- **string**: A full path like `/profile/settings` or a relative path like `../settings`.
- **object**: An object with a `pathname` and optional `params` object. The `pathname` can be a full path like `/profile/settings` or a relative path like `../settings`. The `params` can be an object of key/value pairs.

## `useSegments`

> Returns a list of segments for the currently selected route. Segments are not normalized, so they will be the same as the file path. e.g. `/[id]?id=normal` -> `["[id]"]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Returns a list of segments for the currently selected route. Segments are not normalized so that they will be the same as the file path. For example, `/[id]?id=normal` -> `["[id]"]`.
```
